Why is it challenging to use our gift of speech wisely?
Because something powerful constantly works against us.
What is it?
Imperfection.
The tongue is powerful. It can do much good.
But because of imperfection, it can also cause much harm.
This thought is well expressed in the Bible book of Proverbs.
For example, Proverbs 12, 18 says,
Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of sword.
But the tongue of the wise is healing.
In Proverbs 18, 21 states,
Death and life are in the power of the tongue.
Those who love to use it will eat its fruitage.
Words have power, so we need to be careful about what we say and how we say it.
Perhaps you can recall when someone spoke unkindly to you and hurt you deeply.
On the other hand, thoughtful speech can mend an aching heart and heal friendships.
Because of imperfection, we all have difficulty controlling our tongue.
This was true even of the first century disciple James.
He humbly acknowledged the challenge that all humans face in the third chapter of his inspired letter.
Notice how James described this in James chapter 3 verses 3 to 6 and verse 8.
If we put bridles in the mouth of horses to make them obey us, we guide also their whole body.
Look also at chips.
Although they are so big and are driven by strong winds, they are steered by a very small rudder,
wherever the man at the helm is inclined to go.
So too, the tongue is a small part of the body and yet it makes great brags.
See how small a fire it takes to set a great forest ablaze?
The tongue is also a fire.
The tongue represents a world of unrighteousness among our body members.
For it defiles all the body and sets the whole course of life on fire and it is set on fire by Gehenna.
And verse 8.
But no human can tame the tongue.
It is unruly and injurious, full of deadly poison.
In addition to inherited imperfection, our upbringing could also be a factor.
The watchtower of September 15, 2006, page 21, paragraph 6, states.
In addition to human imperfection, family environment plays a role in the misuse of the tongue.
Some people were raised in homes where parents were not open to any agreement.
Without self-control, fears.
Despite such challenges, it is possible for each one of us to seek peace and pursue it.
Jesus set a good example in using the gift of speech wisely.
He used his speech to encourage and comfort others.
While on earth he applied to himself the words, founded Isaiah chapter 61 verse 1, which states the following.
The spirit of the sovereign Lord Jehovah is upon me, because Jehovah anointed me to declare good news to the meek.
He sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the wide opening of the eyes to the prisoners.
As recorded at Matthew 12 verse 20, Matthew applies the words of Isaiah 42, 1 to 3, to Jesus.
In Matthew 12 20, he stated,
No bruised read will he crush, and no smoldering wick will he extinguish, until he brings justice with success.
We learn an important lesson from such verses.
Jesus recognized that the tongue has power, power to harm, and power to heal.
The watchtower of February 15, 2015, page 13, and paragraph 11,
thus stated that, quote, Jesus showed discernment in all he said and did.
Can we imitate Jesus more closely?
If so, what will you do the next time an opportunity arises for you to use your gift of speech wisely?
In the following dramatization, notice how the wise use of the tongue helps to heal.
With your knees, especially this side.
Oh, thanks.
You've given me so many great ideas.
Yeah, but you make them.
I can't believe it.
Oh, this is my song.
Mine too.
You have a treasure place in your hopeless house.
He will help you.
Ah, ah, ah.
Oh, he's like a drug addict.
Oh, stop.
I'll tell you who else thinks it was.
Someone's like, you better give it to me.
You're like, honey.
Veronica, oh my goodness.
She's in love with her own voice.
She's a visitor at the hall, like she's the only one that can seem.
And my first thought, oh no.
Here we go again.
I've seen this movie before.
You don't think she's showing off?
Is this just about Ellie?
Seems it's all about Ellie.
Is there just a little bit of envy in there?
I've lived it.
If it's the case of her being more careful, how she comes across,
that's another matter.
What did she suggest?
I should tell her that she needs to stop.
Can you believe that?
Especially as a pioneer.
What kind of example is this?
How quickly it snowballs out of control.
You are such lonely.
You've got nothing better to do.
How difficult it can be to unravel.
I shouldn't have judged you so harshly.
I shouldn't have judged you at all.
A chance to forgive is a chance to imitate Jehovah.
Think back to a time when you wanted forgiveness.
Has anyone ever tried talking to her about her singing?
You know what I love about Veronica?
She's probably the most hospitable person I know.
Always open-house at her place.
And can she cook?
Have you tried her curry?
We should use our gift of speech to honor God and to benefit others.
And if somebody gets angry at us,
our mild reply can defuse the situation.
As Proverbs 151 says,
a mild answer turns away rage,
but a harsh word stirs up anger.
We can also use our gift of speech to console and encourage others.
1st Thessalonians 5, 11 and 14 states.
Therefore, keep encouraging one another and building one another up,
just as you are in fact doing.
On the other hand,
we urge you brothers to warn the disorderly,
speak consolingly to those who are depressed,
support the weak, be patient toward all.
Yes, even faithful servants of Jehovah may at times struggle with depression.
How can we help such ones?
Off a specific genuine commendation to help them see their own value in Jehovah's eyes.
Share with them the powerful words of Bible texts showing that Jehovah truly cares about
and loves those who are broken at heart and crushed in spirit.
We can also use the power of our tongue to provide much needed encouragement to others.
Has a fellow believer lost a loved one in death?
Some pathetic words expressing our care and concern can comfort a grieving heart.
Is an elderly brother or sister feeling unneeded?
A thoughtful tongue can reassure older ones that they are valued and appreciated.
Is someone struggling with the chronic illness?
Kind words shared on the phone or in person can do much
to lift the spirits of one who is sick.
How pleased our Creator must be when we use the power of speech to other sayings
that are good for building up?
We may not be able to fix their problems,
but we can let them know that we love them and we care about them.
For example, you can arrange to spend time with Him or her.
Additionally, we can use God's word to strengthen them.
Or you may notice that someone in the congregation is discouraged or depressed.
You could read an encouraging Bible verse and even offer to say a prayer.
We assure such ones that their brothers and sisters in the congregation love them.
And speak in a way that shows that you really mean and believe what you say.
This symposium has given each one of us much to think about.
Has it not?
We have been reminded that seeking peace is not always easy.
We have also learned that pursuit of peace requires effort.
In what specific ways are you resolved to seek peace and pursue it in the days ahead?
May we all continue to pursue peace.
One, by not quickly taking offence,
two, by apologizing, three, by forgiving freely.
And four, by using our gift of speech wisely to encourage and comfort others.
And may Jehovah, the God of Peace, bless you abundantly for doing so.